----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 57
TITLE: Certifying Choreography Compilation
AUTHORS: Luís Cruz-Filipe, Fabrizio Montesi and Marco Peressotti

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
This work presents the certification of a choreography compiler.  Choreographic programming is an emerging paradigm to describe distributed systems via choreographies, i.e. interactions between communicating processes not unlike the way cryptographic protocols are commonly described (yes, a concrete, interesting, example program/protocol would have helped me understand the point better).  The target language is a distributed process calculus.  The certification task is conducted using using Coq.

It should be made clearer that the whole formalization can be found in 13.

This undeniably corresponds to a lot of work.  Besides the formalization of the Choreography language, the certified compilation is around 10000 lines (EPP.v is nearly 5000 lines long, Merge.v is 2000 lines long, and Pruning.v is 1000 lines long).  I understand that the authors want to get the most out of their investment, but I am afraid CADE is not the right medium.  CADE is quite open to paper presenting formalization using proof assistants like these, but since neither formalization per se, nor process calculus are core topics of CADE, it needs a better job at motivating the work.  Currently, the paper remains very abstract.  There is not even one motivating example (a small interesting application of choreography, with its compilation into process calculus).  Is this formalization intended for practical purposes (like, e.g. CompCert), or will it stay a pretty abstract exercise of the mind?

The paper is very carefully written, it is clear, probably at the right level for somebody with a strong interest for formalization in Coq, and knowledge in process calculus.  Again, I am conscious of the enormous amount of energy and clever thinking put into this work, but without more care to motivate your work, I guess you will simply miss the CADE audience.





Minor remarks:

Proving a methodology for EPP correct: maybe change to Proving correct a methodology...

Make sure capital letters show up in titles in the bibliography.
----------- Specific questions for rebuttal -----------
Could you add an illustrative example, that could motivate the work?


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 57
TITLE: Certifying Choreography Compilation
AUTHORS: Luís Cruz-Filipe, Fabrizio Montesi and Marco Peressotti

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
A choreography is a global description of a distributed system written
as a sequential Alice-and-Bob-style program. To be deployed,
choreographies must be projected (compiled) onto separate programs for
each participating node. A standard expected result for such a
projection function is the EPP theorem (Endpoint Projection Theorem),
which states that the compilation enjoys operational correspondence.
This paper presents a Coq formalisation of the EPP theorem, for a
projection function from a variant of Core Choreographies to a
purpose-built distributed process calculus.  Unlike previous published
work choreography formalisation, this one considers a target language
featuring recursion.

Endpoint projection tends to be rather messy, and its correctness
proofs likewise, so a formalisation of this result is a welcome
addition to the literature. The writing is clear and (mostly)
technically self-contained. Proof scripts are available online and
represent a non-trivial amount of novel formalisation work.  Your
result seems stronger than the title implies: you could call it
"certified choreography compilation" instead of "certifying
choreography compilation", since you prove the compiler itself
correct, not individual runs of the compiler.

The reader comes out of the paper assured, as the conclusion puts it,
that "the proof techniques used in the literature are correct, and
identified only missing minor assumptions about runtime terms that
trivially hold when these are used as in-tended". (This "missing minor
assumption" is not mentioned at all until the conclusion---maybe the
discussion of runtime terms in Section 5 could signpost which parts
exactly are novel?)

Beyond that, however, I get the impression that the paper doesn't have
very much to tell me other than "we formalised this". Section 3-7 in
particular comes across as rather dry summaries of how the authors
transcribed their previous pen-and-paper work into Coq using (as far
as I can tell) standard techniques throughout, and we learn how long
the proofs are and that some proofs require case analysis with
hundreds of cases. There is little real discussion about techniques
used, design decisions taken or lessons learned. (The authors refer to
[12], which this formalisation builds on, for design decisions about
the source language formalisation, but that only covers the background
material of the present paper).

The authors appear to have made the decision to present lemmas exactly
as they appear in the Coq sources, or at least with a very close
correspondence between the two. This is laudable for its honesty, but
not optimal in terms of readability. As a representative example,
consider the lemma Network_eq_cross. There are several things you
could do here to make it more readable without straying too far from
the formalisation: instead of p?q?p?r?p?s?q?r?q?s?r?s? you could
introduce an abbreviation like all_distinct [p,q,r,s]?. The following
two lines are difficult to parse, because there are at least four
infix operators in use and no parentheses to indicate precedence. You
could either add more parentheses, or use differences in spacing to
indicate operator precedence.

I'm puzzled by the decision to introduce a separate type XBehaviour to
define merging, it seems overkill. First, the main thing it does that
options don't is allow you to chuck an XUndefined somewhere deep in
the innards of a term, but from the definition of Xmerge it appears
that you don't use this capability: any deep occurence of XUndefined
is bubbled up to the top level. You state that you need to distinguish
between merge failure and undefinedness, which I guess is a reference
to the line starting this "in match BL, BR ...". However, I don't see
how this problem would arise if the type of Xmerge was
Behaviour?Behaviour?option Behaviour. The only difference would be
that the type of BL,BR here would be option(option Behaviour), with
None denoting undefinedness and Some(None) denoting merge failure, so
I fail to see how you'd lose the distinction.

Later on, we learn that the inclusion of XUndefined sets the stage for
future work on choreography repair. If so, I think it would be more
elegant to just include Undefined in the syntax of Behaviour even
though it's not meant to be part of any real program, same as you did
with RT_Call in the source language---saves you some needless
duplication and obviates the need to define injections.

What is the parallel composition of networks with overlapping Pids?

"completeness of EPP is proven by structural induction on the
derivation of the transition performed by the choreography C"

Are you sure you meant to write *structural* induction here?  It's
induction on the semantics not the syntax that you're describing.


----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 57
TITLE: Certifying Choreography Compilation
AUTHORS: Luís Cruz-Filipe, Fabrizio Montesi and Marco Peressotti

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
Choreographies are high-level (global) descriptions of the desired
    behavior of a distributed computation.  Choreography compilation
    (or endpoint projection) translates this to local programs running
    in individual communicating processes.  The present paper describes
    a Coq formalization and correctness proof from a language called
    Core Choreographies (CC) defined by a subset of the authors [24,11]
    into Stateful Processes (SP), designed to be coherent with CC also
    by the authors [10,11].

    Choreographies and choreographic compilation has a lot of
    potential for build correct-by-construction distributed systems.
    But the compilation process is complicated and error-prone, so a
    formalization effort seems indeed a useful enterprise.

    Unfortunately, I found the paper to be poorly written to the point
    of being incomprehensible, despite the compelling nature of the
    introduction and high-level motivation.  The paper mainly consists
    of brief descriptions which seem to require an understanding of
    the prior work in [10,11], an longish definitions and theorems in
    Coq that don't help in this understanding.  As a result, I am left
    uncertain as to what is learned from the enterprise from the
    formalization perspective, and also what has been learned about
    choreographies and choreography compilation itself.  Finally, the
    conclusion indicates that the work is incomplete in its present
    state, not covering the Turing completeness of SP.

    As an example of my simple objections let's consider the syntax of
    choreographies on page 3.  It is not explained what p, q, e, x, or
    l stand for, so I didn't know how to even read Eta.  What is the
    value that is being communicated?  What is the role of x?  What
    does "label communication" mean?  Also, I could not follow at all
    the description of RT_Call X ps C, and the formalization does not
    help.  There are no examples, so there was no way for me to
    understand these definitions.  Also, just quoting lengthy Coq code
    does not help understanding, or at least it didn't help me.

    My recommendation would be to cut down drastically on quoted Coq
    formalization and use informal descriptions and examples to
    explain the key concepts.  Coq formalizations can presumably be
    found in online, so the point of a paper *about* a formalization
    has to be to explain the underlying languages, their semantics,
    their relationship, and the difficulties and lessons learned from
    attempts to formalize them.  I have the feeling the paper tried
    to do this in Sections 4, 5, and 6, but I was already too lost at
    this point to understand.
----------- Specific questions for rebuttal -----------
What were the key lessons learned about choreographies and
    choreographic projection through this formalization effort?


------------------------------------------------------
